# Beginner's guide to Market Modelling

[Source](https://endgameanalytics.com.au/opening-the-black-box-part-1-of-3/)


## Context

### Challenges We Face

Wholesale market modelling is wide-spread in the energy sector and we need to use models to answer the following:
- What combination of generation and transmission do we need to invest in to minimise the price of energy?
- What role do renewable energy such as, solar, wind, renewable gas and batteries do to the NEM?
- What happens if demand rapidly changes?
- How do we retire high-emission generators while sustaining **reliability**, **security** and **affordability**?
- How will prices adjust based on our model?

> We are trying to predict the future, how do we handle as many scenarios as possible?

The industry currently leverages PLEXOS and Gurobi to design, understand and stress test system configs without interacting with physical systems.

### Marketing the Model as a Black Box

Due to the complexity of the model, we face issues where people don't have answers to the results of the model, and because of the aggregate nature, they cannot be explained by experts, and so when advisors cannot provide reasoning, it leads to "scrutiny" and so it undermines the power of modelling.

### Building Intuition through modelling

Using modelling provides us with endless data, allowing us to dig deep, build, challenge and refine our intuitions. Models produce data that allows us to understand mechanisms in the world. i.e. models have gained a great understanding on wind droughts, which provides us info on the availability of gas and in turn, gas-fired generation.

## Understanding the Process

### Capacity Expansion modelling

We want to answer questions like:
- When will existing power stations close?
- When will new generation enter the system?
- What type of tech will make up new generation?

This is associated with LT models.

LT models are based on linear programs (Gurobi in our case), which uses operations research to optimise a linear problem.

In PLEXOS, Gurobi tries to solve constraints, a constraint contains the following:
- LHS: variable to be constraint i.e. $x_i + x_j$ (but more complexed)
- Sense: Operator $\in \set{\leq, =, \geq}$
- RHS: A constant that LHS must compare to, usually a value that a policy needs at a certain value by a certain year.

But of course, to optimise well, we must provide a couple of key assumption and parameters such as:

We are using data provided by AEMO modelled on the ISP-Step-Change Initiative, as a base, we also add our own constraints and modelling parameters based on our own research.

To capture transmission limitations:
- Topo representation of transmission network i.e. Regions and connections b/w regions (see Transmission\\Regions in PLEXOS) (You can also use a visualiser to view the entire network in PLEXOS)
- Line limits representing max flow b/w regions
- loss equation - As energy is transferred, some energy is taken from heat, light etc. we can find this.

To represent a plant we need:
- Installed Capacity
- Fuel cost
- Hydrological data (inflows, reservoir) for hydro-electric plants
- Heat rate
- VO&M (Variable operations and maintenance costs)
- FO&M (Fixed operations and maintenance costs)
- Assumed resource availability (traces) - massive .csv files that we take for granted
- CAPEX (Capital Costs to build new plants)
- Locations to build prospective plants

To represent demand, we need:
- Traces for demand for each region in topology
ASsumptions on amount of Solar PV, behind meter generation (i.e. batteries, VPPs etc.) to help shift load.
  
To capture other constraints, we need:
- Renewable energy target assumptions
- Costs/Limits on Emissions
- Any other factors...


All models also have 2 important overarching assumptions:
- VOLL (Value of lost load) - penalty assigned in the model to a failure of supply enough energy to meet demand (i.e. outages)

### Decision Variables
The solver determines, the optimal combination of decision variables to yield optimal outcomes of important values i.e.:
- When to retire existing plants,
- What and where to build a plant
- Flow of transmission lines b/w regions
- Unserved Energy in each region

As mentioned before, constraints are important for linear program, there are a lot of constraints such as: the laws of physics, operation restrictions on plants or policy objectives.

For the most part they fall in the following:

- Supply-demand constraint: $\quad\forall$ Regions
  - Generation + Net Imports = Demand - Unserved Energy
- Output limits: $\quad\forall$ Generator, Time Period
  - Generation $\leq$ Capacity
- Transmission limits $\quad\forall$ Transmission line
  - Minimum Flow $\leq$ Flow $\leq$ Maximum Flow
- Intermittent limits $\quad\forall$ Wind Farms, Solar Farms
  - Generation $\leq$ Max Half-hourly output for give trace.

### Results

The end result, is a lot of data and information, we essentially end up getting the *decision variables* that are of most interest. 

We also get shadow prices which is reducing constraints to a very small value, which can be interpreted as the marginal cost of an additional unit of supply. Using shadow price, if marginal costs to build is higher than it's shadow price, it remains unbuilt, and if it exceeds, the plant will be built.